Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of
the Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs.
And today I'm joined by Doctor Daniel Simons. He
is a professor in the Department of Psychology at the
University of Illinois where he also directs the visual cognition
laboratory. And today we're focusing on his latest book
together with Dr Christopher Chabris, who I've already have
on the show, by the way, nobody is
fo why we get taken in and what we can
do about it. So Dr Simons, welcome to
the show. It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for having me on. So tell us
perhaps first a little bit about the premise of the
book. I mean, I even have a quote
here where you say that it's basically about exploring the
cognitive psychology of the cheat, the patterns of thinking
and reasoning that make us all vulnerable to deception.
Could you explain that? Yeah. And that's the
broad theme of the book. We took a look
over many years at scams and, and cons and
just regular run of the mill deception across a wide
range of disciplines, everything from investment fraud to cheating
in chess to try and see whether there were any
commonalities across all of them. And what we started
to realize was that there were some common tendencies that
we all have that make it possible for people to
take advantage of us. And there are tendencies that
work well most of the time. But that when
somebody is looking to take advantage of us, they
co opt them or hijack them for their own purposes
. So that was one theme that we found that
was really consistent across a wide range of kinds of
deception. The other was that any of us can
be fooled. We, we have this kind of
intuition that and belief that when you hear about a
fraud, you hear about somebody falling for a scam
. In retrospect, you can see all the red
flags they missed, you can see everything that they
didn't notice along the way. And that makes it
seem like they must be clueless or naive or gullible
. But the reality is that the scammers just happen
to target them well, for that particular scam and
any of us, no matter how educated, smart
, skeptical, critical thinking we are can be victimized
if the targeting is aimed at us. Yeah.
And we'll get into some of the aspects of human
cognition that you explore in the book that make us
susceptible, all of us susceptible to deception. And
I guess that that's uh very good point because actually
, I mean, almost every single time that we
hear about someone falling for what, for us from
the outside seems like a very basic scam. We're
always like, oh, it's because the person was
really gullible or stupid or dumb. Or it's because
she's low in intelligence. But that doesn't seem to
be really the case, at least most of the
time. Exactly. And, and there's, there's
so much entertainment industry depiction of cons and scams.
Right. And you can go to the theater and
see a heist movie, you can listen to a
podcast and hear all about a con artist. But
whenever you do that, you know that there's deception
taking place, you, you are watching it knowing
that it's about deception, which means that you're looking
for all of those hallmarks, you're treating it more
like a mystery where you're trying to figure out where
they went wrong. But when somebody is immersed in
the narrative themselves, when they're, when they're the
target of it, they don't see it from that
outside perspective, they only see what they're being provided
and that can lead to anybody if it's targeted,
appropriately being fooled. But do you think that there
is good evidence that we have sort of a truth
bias that is that we most of the time tend
to believe or have this tendency to believe at face
value on what people are, what other people are
saying? And I mean, if so, is
that really a problem? Because isn't it that at
least most of the time, there's very good reasons
to think that what someone is saying is actually true
. Yeah. Absolutely. And most of the time
nobody's trying to deceive us. So it makes sense
for us to accept what we're hearing is true most
of the time. That's what we call a truth
bias. That the idea of a truth bias is
a little more nuanced than, than just accepting everything
is true. It's the idea that whenever we hear
something, whenever somebody tells us something, our initial
evaluation of what they've said assumes it's true regardless of
what it is. And then it takes a little
bit of time or a little bit of effort to
rip it apart if we think it's wrong. So
, and you know, it's easier in some context
than others. If somebody says something that we firmly
don't believe or there's somebody that we don't ever trust
, we know not to trust them, we're going
to discount what they say pretty quickly. But um
, we have to take in what they're saying,
process it make sense of it. And part of
that is kind of like the need to accept that
it's real that it's true before we then debunk it
. So a truth bias is really a functional thing
. We have to have that otherwise we couldn't interact
with anybody around us, our society would not be
able to function. We have to trust that most
of the time what we're hearing is true. And
that's the base rate for that is good, right
? That, that's actually what we want to be
doing. Um The trick comes in how people who
are trying to deceive us, take advantage of that
. They'll give us some information that's not true,
but then not give us the opportunity to tear it
apart or to critique it or to realize that it's
false? And are there specific conditions where people remain
uncertain or skeptical of what someone claims? I mean
, are there specific situations, cases conditions where uh
I mean, even though for most situations, if
someone just says something that doesn't trigger in us,
I mean, our perhaps uh uh deception uh detecting
or a device or something like that. Uh I
mean, that, that we e even then think
, OK, so in this particular case, I
will remain skeptical until I learn a little bit more
. So I think we often do that we should
do it a lot more remaining uncertain is probably the
best thing we could do to avoid spreading unintentionally spreading
misinformation or repeating falsehoods. I if you remain uncertain
a little bit longer and look for more information,
that's a great strategy to make sure you're not being
fooled. Um And there, there certainly are going
to be context when we are going to do that
, right? We're going to be more willing to
be skeptical when it's something that we had doubts about
to begin with when it kind of ran counter to
our beliefs or our ideology or our, you know
, willing. So if somebody, for example,
provides scientific evidence, claims to provide scientific evidence for
ESP um I don't believe that's likely to be true
. I think there's plenty of good reasons not to
believe that that's true. Um As a scientist,
I should remain uncertain as long as I can until
the evidence becomes overwhelming. In that particular case,
I think it's pretty overwhelming, but let's say that
somebody provides some evidence for something that I don't agree
with, I don't think is likely to be true
, but it might be, well, that's a
context in which I should remain uncertain a little bit
longer. I should be willing to accept the possibility
that I was wrong um initially or that the evidence
that they're providing is wrong and that, that's a
great strategy to use. It's one that we should
use a lot more than we do. Uh including
scientists, scientists don't remain uncertain as much as they
should. They're much more willing to take on a
strong belief and then discount anything that runs counter to
it. But we should remain uncertain until the evidence
is clear. The problem is we rarely have the
time or energy or willingness to do all of the
digging that we need to, to show that it's
actually clear. Mhm And so let's get into the
aspects of human cognition you explore in the book that
really makes uh make us all susceptible to some,
at least some degree of deception. So you talk
about four different things, focus prediction, commitment and
deficiency in the book. So starting with focus,
what is this really about? Yeah. So those
four, those four elements are what we call habits
. So there are cognitive tendencies that apply most of
the time in our daily lives, the things that
we have to do that usually are really, really
effective for us. So focus is the idea that
we primarily direct our attention to what we have right
in front of us. The information that we have
most of the time, the information we have is
the information we need. So it makes sense to
focus on what we're doing, what we're looking at
what we're thinking about at that moment. Um The
challenge of focus is that we often don't realize when
we don't have information that we might actually need and
that's where we run into problems. Um So the
idea of focus is that most of the time we
use the information at hand to do what we need
to do with it, to make sense of the
world. And that's usually a great thing and we
usually don't have to worry about all of the other
stuff that would just be distractions from the thing we
want to pay attention to. The problem comes when
the things that we're missing really should be influencing our
judgments, our decisions or our reactions to the world
and people who are looking to deceive us will deliberately
focus your attention on one thing. So, if
you've ever been to a magician's show, a magic
show, the magician is going to direct your attention
, they're going to get you to focus on the
effect what they're wanting you to see and away from
the method, the hidden information that they're trying to
, um, that they're trying to keep away from
you and they're going to do lots of things to
focus your attention. They're going to have a lot
of witty banter and joking that gets you focused on
what they're saying and not what they're doing. But
again, the idea is we focus on a limited
amount of information. We can't focus on everything.
And the end result of that is sometimes the things
that we're not focusing on are things we need to
pay attention to. Uh you mentioned magicians there.
But I guess that there's another instance where people really
try to make us focus on just the positive aspects
of, of something and make us lose focus of
the perhaps more negative aspects of something. Like,
for example, when uh a company is trying to
sell uh uh uh its products, I, I
mean, in advertisement and all of that advertisement is
basically all about that, right? It's basically about
focus and just focusing on the positive aspects of products
. So how do they do that? Exactly.
Well, I mean, that, that's, they're
just taking advantage of the fact that we do that
naturally. So, advertising, I don't tend to
think of advertising in the same light as cons and
deceptions. Um, there they have a goal,
they want you to think about their product and not
alternative products. They want you to be directed attention
to the positive features of their product and not to
the negative ones. Right. So, um,
so what do they do? They just don't present
the negative ones, they present only the positive ones
and we tend to kind of think that those are
representatives. So I think one of the best examples
of this is um demos. So uh showing a
video of a car driving itself and we see that
video and say, wow, OK, I could
, I would love to be able to do that
and just read a book while the car is driving
me to work. Um And we think about all
of the possible ways that that same process could generalize
. We assume that what we're seeing is representative of
what that car can do. Um And we don't
think about all of the things that they haven't shown
us things like how many times did they try and
do that demo before it worked once? Um How
many times did the car drive off the side of
the road? How many times did it run a
stop light or a stop sign? Um We don't
think about those sorts of things. Does it only
work on straight roads? Does it only work in
perfect sunlight conditions or would it not work if it's
raining? What if a pedestrian ran out into the
road? We don't tend to think about those things
in real time while watching this demo. Instead,
we take it as representative, our focus on that
demo take treats it as typical of what happens in
the world and the end result is we just don't
think about the information we don't have. So advertisers
aren't having to do a whole lot to get us
to focus on their product. All they have to
do is present the information they want us to have
and they can kind of count on us not thinking
about the information we don't have unless they say something
really egregious, then we might take a step back
and say, wait a second. Is that really
true? And think about it, in which case
they've lost us, that's not what they want us
to do. And I guess, I guess that
apart from the product, something that they do often
is that they present next to the product, high
status or very famous people, right? And that's
another thing that perhaps make us lose focus on some
of the potential negative aspects of the products. Right
. Sure. And that, that's actually tapping into
one of the hooks that I guess we'll talk about
in a little bit of familiarity. As well.
It's, it's tapping into the idea that for somebody
who's a very famous person we kind of feel like
we know them even though we really don't. And
that familiarity makes us trust things more. So.
Yeah, they, they use a lot of the
advertising uses a lot of these sorts of tactics.
Um, they take advantage of a lot of our
strategies for how we process information. Um, just
like people looking to actually deceive us do. Mhm
. And do you think that there are perhaps some
strategies, some things that we could do to counter
this tendency that we have to narrowly focus on just
one piece of information? Well, I mean,
it depends what you mean by, by counter them
. Can we make it so that we can take
in everything at once? No, I mean,
and, and people like to kind of think so
. So you might know my earlier studies with people
passing basketballs and a person in a girl suit walking
through a video. Um, and people don't,
about half the time people who watch that don't see
the gorilla. Um, and one of the most
common questions I get is, well, you know
, what can I do? So that I see
the gorilla and my reaction to that is first,
there's nothing you can do that would make it so
that you can always see unexpected things. And second
, that would be a terrible thing for you.
You do not want that because there are limits on
how much we can pay attention to and those are
structural limits on how our minds work. We all
have that sort of limitation we can't take in everything
all at once. Instead, we have this remarkable
ability to focus on what we care about and to
ignore distractions that's essential. Can you imagine trying to
drive down the road and not be able to ignore
everything that's going on on the buildings next to you
and on the sidewalks, that's irrelevant to what you're
doing. You'd be perpetually distracted. You couldn't focus
on what you needed to do and an inability to
focus is harmful. That's a problem for a lot
of people. Um we all have the ability to
focus to some extent, right? We, we
can do that, but you can't get to the
point that you take in everything and notice everything because
then you couldn't focus anymore. And given that we
have limitations, we have a total amount of resources
that we're able to use. Anything you use up
on stuff that you don't care about is stuff that
you're not using for what you do care about.
Mhm. And I guess that the aspect you mentioned
there about expectations leads us to the second habit.
You're exploring the book that has to do with prediction
. So what's that about? Yeah. So prediction
is uh the idea that we tend to kind of
look for the things that we expect to be there
and want to be there. Um You can think
of this as a little bit like the idea of
confirmation bias. We tend to look for information that's
consistent with our beliefs as opposed to inconsistent with our
beliefs. But we, we frame this a little
bit more broadly, which is that um when we
are given information that fits what we predict, we
tend not to question it as much as we do
when given information we disagree with. So if you're
online and somebody posts something that is completely opposite to
your ide ideology or your politics, you're probably going
to be highly critical of it. And we're really
good at tearing apart things. We don't believe in
. We all have that sort of critical ability to
rip something into pieces. But if somebody happens to
share something that you happen to agree with, you're
not likely to dig into it as deeply as you
would otherwise. And if you don't dig into it
, you might not realize that it's based on weak
evidence. So you can pass off something that's not
true by making it consistent with what people want to
believe. And a huge amount of the misinformation we
see online is targeting people with information that they believe
it's not, it's not trying to fool me into
thinking something that I don't believe in the first place
. It's spreading it to people who are likely to
believe it who then spread it along to other people
and that makes it kind of gain this sort of
mass spread. Um So the whole idea of that
sort of viral transmission is not, not persuading people
who disagree with you because they're going to tear it
to pieces. It's reaching the people who would agree
and not think critically enough. So, the idea
of the, the habit of prediction is that we
, um we tend to not think as critically about
. We tend to accept the truth of things that
we expect and that we predict more than things that
we don't. And perhaps linking here to one of
the first points we made in our conversation when we
mentioned that being deceived as very little or nothing to
do with people being more gullible or less intelligent.
I mean, I can't it be, can't it
happen that if someone is better at reasoning, they
might even be more blinded by their own expectations?
Yeah, there's some, there's some suggestions of that
in the literature that people reason really well, e
even for simple problems known as syllogisms, where you
give people a logical sequence, where you, you
give them two premises and then a conclusion. If
that conclusion fits your beliefs, you tend not to
question whether it's logically sound as much as you do
if it, if you disagree with it. So
if you have a conclusion that gun regulations save lives
, which is of course an issue in the United
states, um, not as much elsewhere in the
world, fortunately, uh for the rest of the
world. But, um, if you believe that
gun regulation will save lives, then a conclusion that
fits that, even if it's not logical, even
if the premises don't lead to that conclusion, you're
going to tend to accept it as true. Whereas
if you think that gun regulations are bad, you'll
find the logical flaws and the same thing. If
you flip it, if you think if you've reached
the conclusion that gun regulations are going to hurt safety
, then if you believe that you're not going to
be as critical as of premises that just that don't
match it, right. They don't actually lead to
that conclusion. So, yeah, very smart.
People can tear apart conclusions that don't follow if they
disagree with them but are not as critical when it
comes to things that they agree with and can this
sort of expectation based reasoning have a negative impact specifically
in science and the production of scientific knowledge? I
think it's actually the biggest source of inadvertent scientific errors
, just mistakes. Um One way to think about
this is imagine you're doing a study and you have
a new experimental treatment and you want to test it
in a randomized clinical trial. So you have a
treatment and you have a placebo and you expect the
treatment to do better than the placebo and that's what
you find in your results. So great. Publish
it. What if you had found that the placebo
did better than the treatment? What would you do
as a scientist? You go look at your data
and see. Did I get something wrong? Did
I mislabel the columns? Did I get them backwards
? Um Were there some problematic data points in there
, were there some participants who weren't, you know
, assigned correctly? So you'd look for problems and
you look for mistakes And the key is that you
look for mistakes more when something is unexpected and not
what you predicted, and you're probably less likely to
do that when it's predicted. And one of the
most famous examples of this sort of error um came
from work by uh Reinhart and Rogoff, who economists
at Harvard, who were interested in pushing the idea
of austerity for fiscal austerity. So they analyzed uh
historical data from a bunch of countries and their claim
from their evidence was that once the country's debt reached
90% of its GDP that their economic growth tapered off
, it crashed. So that was an argument that
we shouldn't be spending our way out of economic problems
because increasing the debt is going to kill our economic
growth. Um The problem was that it was at
the conclusion, the data were actually based on an
Excel spreadsheet error. They didn't fill down an equation
all the way down to the bottom. They,
they stopped after 15 countries didn't go to all 20
countries and the result doesn't hold if you actually include
the rest of the countries. So it literally was
just an error. Um And it was an innocent
mistake. I don't think there was any intentionality.
There, there was no fudging of data, there
was no, you know, there, there was
no scamming going on there, but they firmly believed
this idea of austerity and when the results happened to
perfectly match it, they ran with it. They
didn't bother to check it. I guarantee you that
if that result had come out the opposite, if
they had filled down and made a mistake in their
Excel spreadsheet, that had led to the claim that
austerity was terrible and that you could continue spending as
much as you want. And there's no problem,
they would have really triple checked their data and found
the mistake. So that creeps in all the time
. I think in scientific era that people are much
more likely to rigorously check things that don't match what
they predicted than there are things that perfectly match what
they predicted and being realistic here. And since scientists
are also people and like other people, they have
basically the same psychology. Uh Do you think that
uh since we can't expect scientists to not have any
expectations at all that this would be a point in
favor of something like viewpoint diversity in science? I
I think the first thing we should assume is that
scientists always have opinions because we're human. So we
always have beliefs, we always have expectations. We
can't view things completely neutrally. Um I think this
is an argument for implementing policies that make it harder
for us to fool ourselves because the real danger in
science is fooling ourselves. Uh Most scientists are not
trying to fool other people, but they can be
fooled themselves and then they spread information that's wrong.
Um I think there are a lot of things we
can do to actually hedge that. So one is
to uh use different approaches to publishing. So one
is to write your analysis scripts in advance of the
study um before you have any data and test them
out with pilot data that you know, has different
characteristics. So that when you apply to the real
data, you know that the analysis isn't going to
have an Excel spreadsheet error in other is to not
use Excel for your data analysis, but that's a
different issue. Um The other thing that I do
in my own lab now is that for every study
we do, um Typically I am a graduate student
each independently code the data analysis. So we,
we write the analysis separately ourselves and make sure that
we get the same results. And if we don't
, normally it's just something, you know, a
tiny coding bug, but you want to catch those
before you publish them and that catches these sorts of
mistakes. Because if we're both analyzing the data,
it makes it less likely that we're both going to
make exactly the same error in, in our analysis
or exactly the same error in our coding and you
can find the discrepancies and figure out what's wrong with
them. So I think those are good things to
do um in terms of ideological diversity. Yeah,
I mean, the real challenge is, of course
, people aren't going to believe the opposite side.
There are plenty of examples of this in science,
you know, in every field of science, um
there are sub fields in psychology, for example,
where there are two sides and they don't believe what
the other side has to say. And it doesn't
really matter how strong the evidence is, they won't
listen to the other side and that's not productive,
right? We don't advance. Um I don't think
it's necessarily a terrible thing for science as a whole
because people outside of that fight who don't have a
stake in, it can look at the evidence from
the outside and say, ok, well, here's
what they're arguing about and I find one side more
plausible than the other. So people not immersed in
that fight, they're going to be able to take
a step back and be more objective because they don't
have, they don't have a horse in the race
, right? So for them, it's not,
it's not as ideologically, you know, complicated um
for the debate about, you know, I,
I think the debate about ideological diversity, I think
it's not just political diversity, it, it's having
a range of views so that you aren't all expecting
exactly the same outcome and that, that can be
true for a really narrow, boring question. You
know, is there memory for where you've searched items
, letters in a display before or after, after
you've searched that location? Is there any reference to
that you've been there before? That's, that's a
debate within part of the field I'm in. There's
nothing, you know, deep and meaningful to anybody
outside of that debate, but people within it are
going to hold strong views. That's ok. So
, I, I think there's inherently diversity in the
sense of having different perspectives on the same phenomenon,
um, in science that otherwise there's no interest in
doing a study that everybody knows will come out the
same way. And I have this discussion in my
lab all the time that if a student says I
often have an undergrad student who will propose a project
. And it's like, you know, wouldn't it
be interesting if this were true? It's like,
oh, that's, that's great. But often they'll
propose a study that's, um, like, ok
, and I'll ask them, is there any reason
anybody would disagree with your prediction? And if there's
not, then maybe it's not as interesting to do
it, it's more interesting to do those studies where
if it comes out one way it supports one view
if it comes out a different way, it supports
the other view. And both of those are interesting
. That's, that's the optimal kind of study.
And the third habit you mentioned in the book is
commitment. So couldn't tell us first what commitments are
and perhaps the differences between assumptions and commitments because that's
also something you explore in the book. Yeah.
So a commitment is an assumption that's held so firmly
that we no longer are willing to question it and
we don't think about it at all anymore. It
just becomes ingrained in how we act. So we
all make assumptions all the time. We have to
, you have to, we don't always have all
the information. We have to assume a lot of
things about the world and about how other people are
acting with us. And so assumptions are, are
normal. What we expect commitments are when they can
sometimes become uh maladaptive. So, so often we
want to have strong commitments to some things, right
? We, we, we that's not necessarily a
bad thing. Most of the time the problem comes
when you are so firmly committed to something and it
happens to be wrong that you don't question it.
So I think my favorite example of this from,
from the book uh was um a discussion of a
person who was a victim of Bernie Madoff's Ponzi scheme
. So the investment Ponzi scheme fraud biggest Ponzi scheme
in the modern era. Um And there were a
number of people who were questioning what was going on
with Madoff's scheme. They were suspicious that there was
something fraudulent going on. And one of them told
one of his customers that had a customer whose parents
were heavily invested in NADO. And he's told this
customer it's like, you know, you should tell
your father this isn't good. He should be getting
out of this. Um, he shouldn't be trusting
this and the father's response was, well, he
just doesn't know Bernie. I know Bernie and Bernie
would never screw us. That's a commitment. It's
so firmly beheld that there's no way that Bernie Madoff
could possibly be somebody who would treat us badly.
And when you're committed to that belief, anything goes
, you, you're not willing to take a step
back and say, could this be a fraud because
he'd never screw us? It's a, it's a
firm commitment and we see commitments going leading people astray
in a lot of sort of conspiracy thinking. And
in politics where people are so firmly holding the belief
that this person, this politician, this person I
like is infallible. They can do no wrong.
They only tell the truth that you have to go
to incredible lengths to kind of make all of their
inconsistent statements hold together because you've got that commitment that
you can't back away from and it can lead you
down this conspiratorial rabbit hole where you try and find
all of these things to make everything work. It's
like trying to find ways to make it so that
all of the planets in the sun are orbiting the
earth. Right? If you start with that assumption
, you can find all sorts of weird convoluted ways
to make it seem like it kind of works given
the evidence at hand, even though it's wrong and
for anybody on the outside who doesn't have that commitment
, it seems crazy, But from the inside,
it's logically coherent and that, that's where you run
into these problems where people can't talk to each other
because one has a commitment that's so firm that they've
gone down an entire path of logic, very reasonable
, entire path of logic starting from that commitment that
they never questioned. But psychologically speaking, when it
comes to this move from a simple assumption to a
commitment, what is it based on exactly? Is
it trust, confidence or some other thing? You
know, that's a great question and I don't have
a great answer for it. It's, uh the
, the, I think the key challenge for making
sure that you're not being deceived is thinking about what
are the assumptions that you won't question. And sometimes
those, you know, those are reasonable assumptions.
Um, you know, I have an assumption that
people can't predict random events better than chance. And
I think there's a lot of evidence to back that
assumption, but it's an assumption. Um, if
I became firmly committed to it, even if somebody
were to come along and prevent present unquestionable evidence at
some level, I wouldn't accept it. And that's
for a scientist that becomes a problem when you're so
committed that you won't look at evidence that challenges your
perspective. That's when it's moved into commitments rather than
assumptions. And, um, but what, what
leads people to go that route? That's, it's
a great question. I wish I had a strong
answer for it. That's fair enough. So let's
get into the final habit before we talk about the
four hooks you want to explore in the book.
So, efficiency, what, what does that mean
in this context? Exactly. Well, efficiency is
just a tendency. We have to try and get
things done in the fastest way and simplest way we
can with the least effort, which the vast majority
of the time is exactly what we want to do
. You don't want to take the long way to
work, you want to get there quickly. So
, um efficiency is, is usually a great thing
and it just means that we sometimes don't ask questions
when we should. Um So when people are looking
to deceive us, they take advantage of the fact
that we aren't likely to ask more questions. We're
not likely to dig deeper and we take glib empty
answers as good enough so that we can move on
. And one way to think about this is it
can be really uncomfortable and awkward to ask for more
information. So imagine you're at a psychic performance and
you stand up and say, well, you know
, do you, do you actually know that this
person had bone cancer? Um You know, or
, well, you started with Rob and then you
said Bobby, uh why did you start with Bobby
? Those sorts of questions are awkward to ask and
imagine you're getting a, a business pitch. Um
Somebody's pitching your, you and they want to um
they want to be a consultant for you and they
cite all of their, you know, success stories
like, well, that's great. Um It's really
uncomfortable to ask, what are all your failure stories
? How many other companies have you, have you
uh consulted for that? Didn't get these results?
Um You know, asking those sorts of questions is
exactly what we need to get more information. It's
, it's, you know, it's recognizing when somebody
is getting us to focus on the information they're presenting
. And in that for the sake of efficiency,
we often don't question even when we probably should.
We take empty answers as, as good enough like
, oh, well, it's been validated. What
does that mean? We're using best practices whenever somebody
says that it often means that they can't define what
a best practice is. Um My favorite of these
is somebody saying, well, we're being transparent whenever
somebody says that they're not being transparent because being transparent
means showing not say not telling, right? Showing
what you've done. So if you're being transparent,
like, well, how are you being transparent?
What, what have you shown us? Um I've
run into that all the time. Like university administrators
bragging about how transparent they're being when they haven't actually
given any information. Yeah. Uh but don't you
think, and if you disagree, please tell me
, but don't you think that there are perhaps situations
cases where when it comes to asking more questions,
uh perhaps uh we are simply not sure about what
are, what are the correct questions to ask because
we are not familiar with that particular kind of subject
or where someone might be trying to sell us,
for example. And in that case, I mean
, it's also a lack of information. Uh And
the fact that because we lack that information, we
don't really know what questions we should ask. I
think that's exactly right. That much of the time
, we don't know what, what information we still
need, we don't know what to ask. And
of course, people are going to take advantage of
that because people are going to be not confident about
asking a question if they don't have some idea of
what they want to get out of it. Um
So that's how, that's how people will bluster past
you and take advantage of your efficiency. It's efficient
not to ask questions. Um It's also efficient to
avoid kind of making yourself uncomfortable, right? Because
that's just gonna take more effort and energy. Um
But I think there are a lot of things you
can do just to, to start asking questions that
sometimes will reveal more even if you don't quite know
what you want. So, one good thing is
what else can you tell me or say more?
And it's not a question but it gets, gets
whoever you're talking to, to, to talk more
and you know, that, that's like that standard
sort of trope of detective movies where, you know
, you've got the, got the person who you
think is the criminal there and you just want them
to talk more so they give them, give away
information, same principle in cases that aren't that adversarial
just say, OK, can you, can you
tell me a little more or say more about that
? Um And if you do that people will talk
more and if they talk more, that might raise
more specific questions you could ask. So that's,
that's a good tactic to just start out. Um
Another, another question you can ask, that's a
little more directed that uh that we'll get more information
is what could you tell me that might make me
disagree with you, which is, um, a
way of kind of, you know, eliciting this
information that, you know, we really need.
Um, that, that's the sort of question that
I recommend that journalists ask when they talk to scientists
, like who might disagree with this position. And
why would they disagree with you? And any scientists
should be able to answer that and say, ok
, well, here's why somebody might disagree with my
position. Here's why I think they're wrong, but
here's why they might disagree. And that gives you
an end to what are the commitments that they have
? What are their assumptions, um, who might
have different sets of assumptions and who could you ask
about them? So, the whole idea is to
get people to give you information that they wouldn't spontaneously
give you if they were trying to take advantage of
your willingness not to ask questions and you're willing just
to kind of get through things efficiently. Uh Also
because in this particular case, I would imagine that
if you're not familiar with the whatever the other person
is talking about or trying to sell you, for
example, that's also a way of getting more information
. And I mean, if at the end of
the conversation, you still do not fully understand what
they're trying to sell you, then perhaps it's just
better to not buy. Yeah. And I think
that's often the often the case, right? That
more often than not the reason for asking questions is
to get more information. Well, one way to
get more information is to ask really focused questions.
If you happen to know enough to ask those,
the other is just to get the person to talk
more because when somebody is trying to advertise to you
. They want to show you just the information they
have in front of them that they want to provide
you. If they have to talk more, if
they just start repeating themselves, then you know that
they actually don't have anything to say. But if
they can provide more information that you might have a
better understanding. So, yeah, absolutely. That's
, that's the whole idea is take a moment,
even if it's just asking one or two more questions
, when you're making an important decision can get you
a lot more information and often one question will lead
to others. Mhm And related still to efficiency.
There's this concept of opportunity costs. I mean,
what are opportunity costs and why is it that sellers
usually do not want you to consider them? Yeah
. So I mean, opportunity costs. The simple
way to think about an opportunity cost is what else
could you do with your time or money? Um
And would you prefer that? So um somebody is
trying to sell you something means that they want to
take your money for their product, which means you
don't have that money available for anything else for any
to invest or to buy something different. Um So
they want to focus you on the benefits of their
product and they don't want you to think about what
else you could use that money for because then you
might not buy the product. So um a lot
of the goal of advertising, of course, is
to get you to buy things without thinking about opportunities
that you might have if you use the money for
something else. Um, I, I think,
uh, yeah, I mean, I think that's
the basic idea of, of opportunity costs. Um
, one thing to think about for opportunity costs is
that, you know, thinking about all of those
opportunity costs is inefficient. So if you have to
think about all of the other things that you might
do instead that slows you down, it means that
you're not making quick decisions, you're having to,
you, you're trying to decide which of several strategies
you want to use for your business. That means
, you know, thinking about what would happen if
you didn't do any of those. Um it takes
extra time, it takes extra effort. So anticipating
opportunity costs and thinking about them is inefficient in the
sense that we don't just plow ahead and get done
and we have a strong drive to do that.
So countering that when it matters is the key.
You don't, you don't want to think about opportunity
costs. Every time you go to the grocery store
and decide to buy a box of cereal, you
don't want to stop and think what else could I
use this money for other than cereal? You know
, if I, if I need breakfast food,
I could think about other breakfast food. But what
if I invested that money now? And you know
how much value would it have to me later if
I skipped breakfast, you don't want to go through
that sort of thought process every time you do anything
you want to think about when it matters and when
it doesn't. And so we've gone through the four
main psychological habits, I guess that make us vulnerable
to deception getting now into the hooks that people use
to deceive us. So in the book, you
go through consistency, precision, potency and familiarity starting
with consistency, what do you that is really about
in this context? But let me step back and
say what hooks hooks are. So um we think
of hooks as information in a form that we find
really attractive. So people who are looking to deceive
us are going to present information in a way that
appeals to us that we find more likely to be
true um that we don't think as much about.
So again, it's one of those tactics people use
to get us to stick with our initial assessment that
something is true and not to question it as much
. And all of these hooks lead us to sort
of jump right in without thinking. So the metaphor
I like to use for this is um a bull
fight, a matador. And so the matador stand
there perfectly still with their red cape and they're going
to wave that cape around and the bull finds that
irresistible and charges um charges right in without realizing that
, you know, there's a blade behind it.
Um So that, that sort of running in without
thinking about it, um is what happens when we
get information that we find particularly appealing and it's not
always just blindly running in, it's just accepting something
is true when we maybe shouldn't. So, um
the first of those that you mentioned is consistency,
which is, and, and again, just like
for the habits, the vast majority of time,
these kinds of information are really good, they're really
useful. Consistency is a perfect example of that.
Usually, if something is consistently the case, that
means it's reliable, that means it's predictable, that
means we can count on it. Um And those
are typically great things for most of what we do
in the world, having something to be consistent is
terrific. That's, that's what we want it to
be. Um The problem comes in that we don't
always recognize first when we shouldn't expect consistency. Um
And don't look for when it should be varying.
But second, when somebody is looking to deceive us
, they use these hooks, they'll present these hooks
without having the underlying truth behind it. So somebody
will present information that seems really consistent because it's fabricated
, not because it's actually genuine and, and reliable
and robust. So uh in fabricated data, um
this is something that happens in science, you know
, unfortunately, more often than we like, um
people will, people who have committed scientific fraud often
will present results that are consistently great. They get
the same result every single time and just as strong
an effect, every single time when in reality,
that's not how randomness works. And it's not how
human behavior typically works. You don't always get the
same thing every single time, especially in sort of
a field where there's a lot of randomness inherent in
it. Um even in physics where you're measuring something
really, really precisely. Um And you want to
get the same results every time there's still randomness in
the measurement and it's not going to be exactly the
same to an infinite level of precision every single time
you expect that noise. So if somebody gave you
exactly the same thing to 20 decimal places, every
single time, you'd worry about it. You should
be worried about it because that doesn't account for how
random things are. Um So somebody who's committing fraud
will present that consistency because we like consistency. It
appeals. If somebody can get the same results every
time, it's like, wow, that must be
true. And the reality is that yes, if
they genuinely got the same result every time, that'd
be great. And we use that as a great
rule of thumb most of the time. But when
somebody is committing fraud, they just don't have to
do the data, don't have to do the actual
studies. They can just make up consistent data.
And that appeals to us and we don't think critically
enough about it. So it's basically that idea if
it's too perfect or too good to be true.
So, I mean, if it, if it
sounds like that then prep probably it's not true.
Well, and that, that's the challenge, right
? Because what sounds too good to be true to
one person sounds just good enough to another. Um
And so it becomes really difficult to use that rule
of thumb consistently because you know, something AAA con
artist or a scammer who is targeting you is going
to make it sound just good enough. Whereas the
person next door to you who hears that same pitch
might say that's ridiculous. That's way too good to
be true, right? So it, it has
to be targeted appropriately. And I think targeting is
what counts for whether you think it's too good or
just good enough, but they're going to present information
that is good enough that you will accept it as
true and they use all of these hooks. But
consistency is I think in science, one of the
most common ones um to give you data that just
seems great. So I think one of the famous
examples of this is Jan Hendrik Schon who's a,
was a German uh uh in America in Bell Labs
, but he, he um studied uh superconductivity back
in the early two thousands and was a physics superstar
young guy at what was then uh Bell labs and
he published, I think 16 papers in the journals
, Nature and Science, the top two science wide
journals, 16 papers in two years himself. And
that's, that's like the output of an entire top
notch physics department in in two years, it might
be higher than that. So superstar um publishing evidence
of superconductivity with different materials. And um it turns
out that uh if you line up all the papers
next to each other, he was reusing the same
data uh and just changing the axes and changing the
materials and changing the voltages in, in the figures
. But the figures were the same um they were
likely just manufactured. It's not clear that there was
ever any result. But that cost, you know
, hundreds of labs, more than 100 labs had
spent years trying to replicate his works and millions and
millions of dollars trying to replicate his work. Um
So it had consequence, but the, the hallmark
of the the misconduct there was that the images were
the same, the data were too consistent to be
possible. Um And the thing I find most interesting
about this sort of scientific misconduct and scientific fraud is
it's out there in the open. It's literally in
the publications, you can see that it's too consistent
to be true, but it gets past peer reviewers
and editors and other scientists for a variety of reasons
. It seems really good, it seems consistent,
you know, and people don't ask one more question
, they process it efficiently, they read it quickly
and say, oh, yeah, he found this
again and that sounds like a positive when in reality
it should be a red flag. Mhm. Yeah
. And that's the thing, right. Even earlier
when we talked about the scientists, that's another sort
of evidence that we can look into, uh,
and make the case that scientists really are like,
uh other people because in, uh, if it
goes past uh peer review and all of that,
I mean, it's not at least not usually the
case that people who are reviewing the studies are really
incompetent. It's just that they are most of the
time relying on these psychological habits. Yeah, I
mean, and, and we can't dig into the
details of every aspect of every paper and compare them
to every other paper that somebody has written in real
time. While we're also doing our own work,
people have to be efficient. Um But I think
this is a great example because it does illustrate that
we all can be fooled by, by people trying
to deceive us, especially if those people who are
trying to deceive us are at all sophisticated about it
. But the people who are being fooled in the
sciences are generally pretty smart, um definitely highly trained
, they're trained to be critical thinkers, they're trained
to evaluate evidence and they still can be fooled.
We all can be if it's targeting it, right
. And if you look at a lot of the
scientific fraud that's out there more often than not.
It's not earth shattering or groundbreaking work more often than
not. It is kind of what we would predict
in, in a field or at least kind of
what a lot of people in that field would predict
and expect. Um It's often a little bit more
impressive in some way. So it's methodologically heroic.
It took a huge amount of effort to do or
it used a group of uh participants or subjects or
, you know, a population or animals that are
hard to access. Um So that makes it more
impressive, right? It, it usually is slightly
cleaner, uh slightly better than what other people have
found. Um So the result is that it kind
of fits right in with other sorts of studies that
have been published, but improves on them a little
bit. So it makes that person seem like they're
just that much better than the other people around them
but not doing something so extraordinary that people immediately doubt
it. So a contrast example for this is um
in, you know, some years ago, a
famous paper published in the top journal in social psychology
claimed to find evidence that people could predict random events
better than chance, right? So essentially a form
of psychic ability and the immediate reaction to that was
no, that's not right. It can't be right
. Um So the question then is what's wrong with
it. Um, but that was because it didn't
fit into what people already believed and it wasn't fraudulent
. I think he just, it was somebody fooling
themselves, um, you know, with their analysis
and there were lots of issues with how they did
their analysis. But, um, it wasn't fraud
and that would have been a dumb study to make
up right, as a fraud because people would immediately
discount it and start digging into it and looking into
the problems with it. So the things that kind
of survive as frauds for a while before they get
caught are typically not outlandish claims. They are typically
landish just, you know, slightly slightly, you
know, slightly impressive. They, they land in
the right spot. They are physically credible enough,
credible enough, right? They, they, they're
still impressive, but they're credible enough and credible enough
within the realm of other things that have been published
in that area. And that, that's kind of
the typical finding. So I think a great example
of science working correctly and not necessarily involving fraud is
, you know, claims of room temperature fusion which
have come and gone repeatedly over the years in physics
. Um, there have been cases of fraud in
, in that world, but more often than not
, it's just somebody who's, there was something odd
about the materials they're working with and they didn't figure
out what it was and it sounded good. So
they went with the claim that it was, you
know, called fusion and then physicists immediately dug into
it because that's a big claim. Right? And
big claims require very strong evidence and people will dig
into them more. Um, that's, you know
, that's part of why those sorts of claims garner
so much attention is that they are out there,
they are a little too far and that's if,
and they're one of those, if true, that
would be amazing sorts of findings. And anytime you
hear, like, if that's true, that would
be amazing. You should be skeptical about it because
, you know, amazing breakthroughs are pretty rare.
Right? So, getting into the second hook,
familiarity, I think that we've already mentioned this briefly
earlier in our conversation. But what does familiarity indicate
to us? Exactly. So, usually familiarity is
a great cue to something being trustworthy. So,
imagine, you know, your friends, your family
, people, you know, personally, um,
if you've been around them for a long time,
you know, whether or not you can trust them
and you know, how much to trust what they
say and how much to discount it. Right.
We all have that relative. We don't trust what
they say. But for the most part, if
you're around people a lot that familiarity makes it reasonable
to continue to trust, to accept the truth of
what they're saying without questioning it as much, it
makes the truth bias reasonable. Um, and that's
, that's a great cue for, for us most
of the time. Um, it becomes a problem
in terms of deception because we mistake superficial familiarity with
genuine familiarity. So we see a celebrity a lot
, we hear a lot of interviews with them.
We kind of feel like we know them and because
we kind of feel like we know them, we
tend not to be as critical when they say something
, you know, as we should. Um,
romance scams, um which are a major source of
scams, financial scams and other sorts of scams right
now, often targeting older folks who are, are
lonely, um, divorcees or widowers or widows.
Um and they, the way they work, it's
almost entirely online and they establish over time familiarity.
They feel you feel like you're getting to know this
person who you're interacting with a lot online, but
you've never actually met them in person and they probably
look nothing like what they tell you they do.
Um And that's those scams are really effective because we
confuse the sort of familiarity we sort of evolved with
interacting with people directly having close associates that we know
really well. Um And can distinguish from people we
don't know very well. We confuse that with,
you know, friends on Facebook who you might never
have met in person or you encounter only on social
media and people can present a persona um very easily
. So somebody looking to deceive you is going to
take advantage of that present themselves like they like a
friend would and take advantage of that experience of familiarity
. And what about uh precision? So what does
it mean to be precise here? And uh but
basically, how do, how can we distinguish reliable
information from detailed concrete information? That is just BS
, that's the real challenge, right? And that's
why these hooks can fool us so easily. Um
So usually if somebody can give you a precise answer
and it's grounded, it's based on real evidence.
That's great. That's really impressive. So that physicist
who can measure some constant to six decimal places,
that's great. They can do it reliably, they
can give you the exact number more or less.
Um And that precision means that they have great understanding
. Um a weather forecaster who can say that it's
going rain will cover 25% of this region uh between
two and four tomorrow. That's a great prediction that's
precise. Um And to the extent that they are
calibrated and do it well, that means they have
a good understanding of the weather pattern for that day
. Um Much better. It's much more informative than
saying it might or might not rain sometime in the
next three days. But that doesn't, that doesn't
have any value to us. So we value precision
because precision usually is a sign of great understanding.
The problem of course, is anybody looking to deceive
us can just fake precision. They'll give us numbers
and those numbers don't necessarily have any meaning to them
. That's where we run into problems that um it's
very easy to give a precise number and make it
seem like it's something genuine when there's no actual evidence
backing it. Mhm. Uh And when, when
, when it comes to potency, there is the
last hook. What is it really about? So
, potency is, are you almost like, you
know, the desire for big fixes, quick fixes
that one, you know, this one simple trick
will fix your problem. And there's a reason why
that Clickbait works well on, on social media.
We all want the sort of quick fix the easy
solution, the, you know, become a master
at something in just a few hours. Um That
sort of ability to radically change things with the minimal
effort. So big effects from small, small effort
, a small intervention, there are rare cases where
that holds true where a tiny little thing can have
a gigantic effect. The discovery of antibiotics, vaccines
, huge consequences from a tiny little thing, right
? That's um those are, you know, those
are rare and few and far between. But we
have this tendency to kind of assume that things should
be easier than they are that we can stave off
the effects of cognitive aging by playing a brain game
for 10 hours like nope, not gonna work.
Um But that, that potency, that desire for
potent effects genuinely is a good thing when it's true
. It's just that we see it far more often
than we think we do. And people who are
looking to deceive us always take advantage of that one
, right, that they can, who are trying
to sell us some sort of fake product will always
claim giant benefits from something that really doesn't have giant
benefits. Um As a general rule, big consequences
require big interventions. You, you don't get,
you don't get a big outcome from a small thing
. Mhm A and again and again, I imagine
that here, as we said, it has nothing
to do or very little to do with cognitive ability
, but with lack of information. Because if,
for example, you are a scientist of a particular
area and you uh are advertised something uh that promises
to get huge benefits from very small investment or from
a very small thing. And you are sort of
familiar with what they're talking about. They would,
you would say immediately, oh this is just BS
come on. It's much more complicated than that.
But people who just lack that sort of knowledge are
much more vulnerable to that kind of advertisement, for
example. And even even scientists fall for this sort
of stuff all the time, right? There is
, there is an entire field of um what sometimes
is called social priming where you, you kind of
flash some words briefly or have people these scramble sentences
. And the claim was doing that sort of trivial
task would have these big effects on behavior, right
? That would actually change what you do. And
it was sort of a cottage industry and social psychology
to generate these effects that were more and more kind
of outlandish, like, you know, scrambling and
unscrambling sentences related to being old makes you walk more
slowly. It just doesn't none of those hold up
. Um But there are tons and tons of papers
in the literature on this Um big interventions designed to
remedy really complex social problems. Um Things like uh
there, there are a whole series of studies recently
that are called sometimes called wise interventions and they're called
wise interventions. The idea is that they don't require
much effort and they are highly efficient and lead to
these big outcomes. So their claims that like doing
a one hour affirmation in a school at the beginning
of school, uh reduces disparities in suspensions for black
and white kids um or increases academic achievement two years
later, like, you know, these are really
complex multiply determined problems in society, right? The
suspension gap has there's so many factors that contribute to
that suspension gap and it's not just something that's going
to go away with a one hour, you know
, thinking about yourself intervention. Um but these things
are pervasive in the schools, um growth mindset interventions
, you probably have heard of growth mindset. Um
Yeah. So there are claims that, you know
, one hour affirmation, you know, one hour
growth mindset, intervention is going to change your academic
performance sometime later. Like no, you know,
that you, you'd be hard pressed to find a
school district in the United States, at least that
doesn't apply growth mindset in some way. And it's
a big industry now. Um If you look,
there's a recent meta analysis of all of these interventions
and most of them had severe method problems, most
of them didn't actually even measure whether the intervention changed
people's mindsets. Um And if you look at the
handful of them that did it, well, there's
basically no effect of these interventions on academic performance or
outcomes. So it's one of these things where it's
, you know, a tiny little intervention to address
something that's a big societal complex problem. And people
find those really appealing and aren't sufficiently critical of them
when they, when they are made because as scientists
, we should be always skeptical of big effects from
small interventions, but they appeal a lot when they're
true. And if it were true, it would
be amazing, right? If, if it were
true that you could just spend an hour and fix
a major problem, that would be great. Just
we tend to find it more appealing than we should
. Yeah. And I mean, I guess that
generally speaking, if we're talking about the multifactorial issue
, if someone claims that just targeting one single factor
will solve it, uh it's probably not going to
happen. Yeah. And there's there's a sort of
, you know, desire to find the single,
the single solution, the single cause, um fixing
one thing to fix all the things. And,
you know, often that's not a terrible approach to
, to look for, to try and find that
single cause. This is a common practice in medicine
, right? If you have somebody who's got a
bunch of symptoms, you want to look to see
is there one thing that's causing all the symptoms?
Um, and often there is, and that's,
that's the simplest possible explanation for what's going on.
Uh, in these cases, it's more commonly,
there's one issue that we want to address. There's
basically one symptom, say racial disparities in suspensions or
, um, and we have that one issue but
it's caused by many, many things and those are
cases where fixing one of those many, many things
isn't going to likely have a complete effect on the
outcome. It's, it works great when you've got
one cause for many symptoms. It doesn't work so
great when there's many causes for one symptom. Right
. So, I have two or three more questions
before we wrap up the interview about the hooks.
Is it that the best deceivers out there resort always
to all four Hooks or can they just resort to
one or two of them or does it work?
Exactly. I, I think it, it varies
a lot. Um, based on what's necessary to
pull somebody in and what the, what the scope
of a deception is for something that's just sort of
AAA, very limited, you know, limited sort
of fooling somebody just, you know, quick encounter
where they're just trying to pass off some product they
might not use more than one or two of these
. Um, something that's a long running scam,
um, likely has to adopt a lot more of
them. So take, uh Bernie Madoff's Ponzi scheme
, I think that's a good example of one,
you know, ran for 15 plus years um where
he didn't process a single transaction, they were all
faked for for that longer duration. And so he
, you know, he, he used focus to
some extent because he's going to give you the information
, you want your returns but not tell you all
of the details about how he managed to do that
. You know the missing information. He's counting on
you not asking how is it that you managed to
get identical returns month to month, year to year
because nobody else can. Um So most people don't
ask that most people don't ask for more information than
he provides. And he, he um he set
people up to expect the same returns every year.
They would get their 8 to 14% every year,
not having any down years. And as long as
they kept getting what they expected, people didn't complain
, they didn't question it. If they had a
big down year, he would have, they would
have questioned it, but he gave them what they
expected. He counted on commitments as we already discussed
that people trusted him and they didn't think he would
be ever the sort of person who would screw them
over. He was also familiar to many of the
people who invested with him. He uh specifically targeted
members of his social community in New York, e
especially um he selected the people who could invest with
him. Um He didn't just let anybody invest with
him, he would turn people away. Um So
he selected the people who he was, he was
in, who are investing with him. Um He
used precision. So he would give people this huge
print out of every of records of trades that were
all fabricated um in their, you know, in
their reports, it wasn't online like it would be
for most major investors. It was just all of
these trade transaction forms. So lots of detail there
that just didn't have anything backing it. It was
, it was a perfect example of, you know
, giving precise information without any substance to it.
Um Potency, maybe he didn't use a whole lot
because we think of potency as the classic Ponzi scheme
where invest now and you're guaranteed 50% returns in six
months. He never did that. In fact,
he kind of performed about the same as the S
and P 500 the major stock index over the course
of his Ponzi scheme. His investment wasn't that outstanding
? It was just stable. It was, you
never had a down year with Bernie. Um So
he used consistency a lot more than he used potency
. But yeah, I mean, he, he
used a lot of these techniques and how he went
about it, which in a way perhaps made it
even more grabbable. Yeah. Well, in order
to keep it, keep it going that long,
he would have to tap into a lot of the
sort of ways of thinking that keep people from questioning
the truth of what he's saying. So, yeah
, that's, that's, that's right. The longer
something goes, the more complex it is, the
more they're going to have to rely on deceiving you
in different ways. Uh And another question I have
here is so we've already mentioned several times how this
has very little or nothing to do with people's cognitive
ability or any other kind of psychological threats. But
isn't it the case that many times scammers or receivers
target specific vulnerable people? Of course, to do
that, they have to have specific kinds of information
about specific people. I mean, some, sometimes
they target just the elderly in general, sometimes they
might target very specific niches of people. Like for
example, if it's a romantic scam, they might
target people that they know are single and do not
like to be single or something like that. But
I, I mean, it's also the case that
uh the, some of the most successful scammers are
also the ones that know who to target. So
there are two different approaches, right? And there
undoubtedly are some people who are more gullible than others
. There are going to be individual differences there.
I don't think that's the defining factor in whether or
not somebody can be scammed. So I think the
danger is in assuming that because you're a smart critical
thinker that you can't be, can't be deceived.
Um That's undoubtedly wrong. Uh The, the idea
that some people are more likely to be seed than
others is certainly true and some people are more easy
to target than others. But there are two different
approaches that scammers can take. One is uh to
specifically learn a lot about a person and meet them
where they are. So, yeah, if you're
a romance scammer, you're not going to target somebody
who's happily married. That's just not going to be
an effective target. If you are using the calling
card scam, which is a standard tactic or the
call center scam where people will call up people targeting
them for a particular uh fear. So often in
the scams are often based out of other countries.
And then we'll call in to say the United States
and we will target people who are here on a
limited visa status or, or here illegally and we
threaten them with deportation or with arrest unless they pay
up right away. That scam is not going to
work on me. It's no work on somebody who
is an immigrant. Um And there are variants of
it that will work. There are variants of that
, that work on professors, right? There's a
, there's a variant of this right now, which
is really clever. So if you are a professor
who gives invited talks at conferences, um on occasion
, uh quite often the conference organizers will arrange your
hotel and some of your travel for you. So
um there's a con right now that's working pretty effectively
um where the con artist will look at the conferences
, figure out who's invited to speak. And we
call those people and pretend to be the conference organizers
to arrange their travel and they'll arrange their hotel and
flight information, which means they get all of their
personal information and their credit card and they have nothing
to do with the conference. They just looked up
the information and targeted. So again, professors can
fall for this and have. Um So that's one
approach is the specific targeting. The other approach is
to allow the victims to select themselves. Um So
I don't know if you have this particular scam in
, in Portugal, but uh where you get an
automated call asking you about extending your cars warranty.
Do you guys have that one? I got that
not about a car warranty about other things, but
yeah, I, I got, I got that
kind of thing. So these are these robocalls.
It's like most people like, yeah, those are
scam. Um But the people who call it back
have just identified themselves as somebody who is a target
. It's somebody who is concerned about their car's warranty
. So they, they self identified. So the
scammers there don't have to waste any time selecting people
. All they have to do is just blast it
out to as many people as possible. And then
some people will respond same thing with the original Nigerian
prints email scam, which has been going on for
decades now. It, it was, it existed
before email. Um as, as letters. Um
But the idea of that scam is they can send
out now millions of those emails, most of which
look ridiculous, right? Most people are not going
to fall for that. Um There's bad grammar.
It's weird, you know, I still get these
in my inbox, um mostly caught by the spam
filters now. But um, but if you think
about it, they're not trying to reach you or
me. They're trying to reach those very small number
of people who have not heard of this scam and
who will respond to that email. So they want
to make it as obvious as possible so that they
don't have to waste any time with people who aren't
going to eventually pay up. They want only the
most gullible, they want the person who calls back
about their car's warranty. So anybody who responds to
that email is a likely target and it's cost efficient
for them because they don't have to waste time with
all of the people who are more skeptical of that
particular email. So, yeah, they scams are
targeted in, in different sorts of ways either by
selecting and really getting to know the people you're,
they're trying to victimize or by allowing people to select
themselves. So, my last question, then I
guess that we can say here that there's no foolproof
way of being able to always identify the scammers and
the deceivers. But I guess that the point of
your book here is for people to be more aware
of the fact that we have this sort of psychological
habits, this truth bias and to perhaps in specific
situations, be more aware and wary of certain things
that people say and, and perhaps ask more questions
in specific situations as well and stuff like that.
Uh Because most of the time our proof bias still
works. Most of the time, all of these
things still work. Um Most of the time,
none of us are very few of us are going
to be victims of a grand con, right?
Most of us are not going to succumb to that
. We'll, we'll all be fooled by misinformation at
times. We'll all be fooled by deception and every
now and then we'll get taken for some money by
somebody who's trying to rip us off. But most
of us are not going to be a victim of
a grand scam of the Madoff variety. Um,
fortunately, um, but I think, I think
your first point is exactly right that, you know
, you'd like to think. Oh, is there
a quick, quick fix an easy solution to not
ever being scammed? And that would, that would
be tapping into the hook of potency if I promised
you that if I, if I said here's all
you have to do to avoid ever being scammed,
there is no such thing and we should know that
after reading about the potency that there's no one quick
fix for a really complex multifaceted problem. Um But
I do think there's an advantage in learning about these
hooks. Um It's a lifelong process to think about
when you need to be skeptical and when you shouldn't
. But all of these hooks and habits are things
that underlie almost all forms of deception so far known
and likely to exist in the future. And as
you start kind of recognizing the patterns, you might
start recognizing when they're at play in times when you're
at risk. So, um one of the strategies
that I think is probably helpful is next time you're
listening to a story about a con or reading an
article about somebody who is taken in, think about
how this con artist applied these hooks and habits.
Um Think about from the victim's perspective, which red
flags did they miss because they were too focused or
because they didn't ask another question when you start examining
the scans and scams in that way, kind of
as we did over the course of doing our research
for the book, you start to see the patterns
and you start to recognizing, start to recognize when
something is maybe a little too good to be true
. Um So I think it's, I think that's
the best approach in general is to try and understand
it from the perspective of the, of the victim
in that moment and how they were targeted and how
they um how the con artist applied these tricks,
um took advantage of them. Great. So the
book is again, nobody is full. Why we
get taken in and what we can do about it
. I'm leaving a link to it in the description
box down below. And Doctor Simons, apart from
the book, would you like also to tell people
where they can find you and your work on the
internet? Sure. Yeah, just Dan simons.com.
It's the easiest place to get all the information.
Great. So I'm adding that to the description and
thank you so much again for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been really fun to
talk to you. My pleasure. Thank you for
inviting me. Hi guys. Thank you for watching
this interview. Until the end. If you liked
it, please share it, leave a like and
hit the subscription button. The show is brought to
you by the N Lights learning and development. Then
differently check the website at N lights.com and also please
consider supporting the show on Patreon or paypal. I
would also like to give a huge thank you to
my main patrons and paypal supporters, Perera Larson,
Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex
Adam Castle Matthew Whitten Bear, no wolf, Tim
Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip Forrest Connelly. Then
the Met Robert Wine in NAI Z Mark Nevs calling
in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis
for Agns Ferus and H her meal and Lain Jung
Y and the Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J Tom
Hummel S friends, David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman
Roach Diego, Jan Punter Romani Charlotte, Bli Nico
Barba Adam hunt Pavlo Stassi Nale medicine, Gary G
Alman, Sam of Zed YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward
Hall, Eden Broner. Douglas Fry Franca, Beto
Lati Gilon Cortez Solis Scott Zachary FTD and W Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki
, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams
, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw
, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey
junior, Old Eon Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris
Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week
in the B brand Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man George
Katis, Valentine Steinman Perros, Kate Von Goler,
Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar. Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular
J Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net
. A special thanks to my producers is our web
Jim Frank Luca, Toni, Tom Ween, Bernard
N Cortes Dixon, Benedikt Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick
Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers
, Matthew lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie
. Thank you for all.